<html>
<h3> It's  at Tate but is it art?</h3>
<p>

Once upon a time there was an emperor who was so fond of dressing up that he cared about doing little else. One day, a self-
proclaimed artisan arrived in the empire, claiming to have discovered a cloth that was invisible to those who were fools and unfit
for their jobs. After paying several bags of gold for a suit of clothes, the emperor impatiently waited to see it. Fearing to be a
fool and unfit to be emperor, however, he asked his most intelligent and qualified servants to check how the artisan's work was
progressing. None could see the cloth but all pretended to be able to, out of fear to be regarded as fools and unfit for their jobs.
When the suit of clothes was finally ready, the emperor pretended to be amazed by its beauty and went on a procession to show it
off to his people. Rumours about the magical powers of the emperor's new clothes had spread quickly. 'Do you see how the light
blues vividly emanate from the cloth?', asked one citizen to another. The crowd pretended to be amazed by the beauty of the
clothes, too - until a child pointed to the emperor and cried: 'But he's got nothing on! Out of the blue, everyone started
laughing and crying: 'The emperor's got no clothes!'
</p>

<p>
To many people, today's art is like a retelling of Hans Christian Andersen's 19th-century tale The Emperor's New Clothes. Consider
British artist Martin Creed and his installation Work No. 227, which consists merely of an empty room in which lights go on and off
at 5-second intervals. Work No. 227 was on display at the 2001 Turner Prize exhibition at Tate Britain, a prize which Creed was
nominated for and ended up winning. So, not only did Creed exhibit his work at one of the world's most prestigious art museums, but
he also won, in recognition of it, a kind of Nobel Prize in the visual arts for Brits under 50. The tabloids were appalled and so
was the general public: how could that possibly be art? In fact, the controversy that has surrounded the Turner Prize is such that
even street artist Banksy had his say on the matter, having stencilled 'Mind the Crap' on the steps of Tate Britain on the occasion
of the 2002 exhibition.
Understood as a retelling of The Emperor's New Clothes, this tale's charlatan is Martin Creed, someone who seeks fame and fortune
at any cost; the emperor is Sir Nicholas Serota, the all-powerful head of Tate; the magical cloth is Work No. 227, art that is
invisible to fools; the emperor's servants are the judges of the Turner Prize, incapable of putting into question Creed's work out
of fear of being perceived as unqualified to be judges; and the child is the general public, naively crying 'But that's not art!'
</p>
<p>
Let's take a step back though. There is no doubt that Work No. 227, valued at around 110,000 pounds, is highly regarded in Tate circles,
having recently been bought for its collection. But what reasons could there be to consider Work No. 227 to be art? What is it that
makes it art? The problem of whether Work No. 227 is art is not one that only philosophers, alone in their ivory towers, should
care about finding a solution to. Tate is a public institution, an institution whose main sponsor happens to be the British
government and hence the UK taxpayer. So let's ask again: what definition of art could possibly make it art?
</p>
<p>
Nothing more and nothing less than the most influential modern definition of art: the so-called institutional definition of art.
According to the institutional definition, something becomes art in virtue of having art status conferred on it by members of a
social institution, the artworld. What makes Work No. 227 art is that representatives of the artworld - in this case, the judges of
the Turner Prize - have conferred art status on it by exhibiting it at Tate. Now, whether Work No. 227 is good art or not is a
different question, and one that the institutional definition is deliberately silent about. All the definition tells us is that it
is art, whether good or bad. The judges of the Turner Prize presumably think that it is good art, but what was puzzling about it in
the first place was how it could be art at all - and now we know. Case closed in favour of the judges of the Turner Prize, right?
<p>
Well, not quite. The institutional definition faces a serious problem: a dilemma. In philosophy and logic, a dilemma is a problem
that starts with a choice between two possibilities and then shows that each of them leads to the same bad conclusion. Think about
it: do representatives of the artworld have good reasons to confer art status on Work No. 227? There are only two obvious
possibilities: either they do have good reasons or they don't. So far so good. Now consider the first possibility, that they have
good reasons. If they have good reasons to confer art status on it, then it's those reasons that ground the claim that it's art.
But, in that case, the conferral of art status is irrelevant - it's the good reasons behind the conferral, not the conferral
itself, that make Work No. 227 art. Now consider the second possibility, that they don't have good reasons to confer art status on
it. If they don't have good reasons, then we should doubt their authority when they tell us that it's art. In this case, the
conferral of art status is also irrelevant - it does nothing to convince us that Work No. 227 is art. Therefore, in either
scenario, the conferral of art status is irrelevant for whether Work No. 227 is art. Martin Creed's work is at Tate, but it looks
like the emperor is still hanging out with no clothes on.
</p>
</html>


